Change 'Ignore Order' to 'Reordering Threshold' (#100)
quicwg/ack-frequency: draft-ietf-quic-ack-frequency.md

  milliseconds. Sending a value smaller than the `min_ack_delay` advertised
  by the peer is invalid. Receipt of an invalid value MUST be treated as a
  connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.
  
Ignore CE:

: A 1-bit field representing a boolean truth value. This field is
  set to `true` by an endpoint that does not wish to receive an immediate
  acknowledgement when the peer receives CE-marked packets ({{out-of-order}}).
  0 represents 'false' and 1 represents 'true'.
  
Reordering Threshold:

> : A 7-bit field representing an unsigned integer that indicates how out of order

Reviewer: In reordering threshold: /how/ or /how many/ or something else?

  milliseconds. Sending a value smaller than the `min_ack_delay` advertised
  by the peer is invalid. Receipt of an invalid value MUST be treated as a
  connection error of type PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

>   

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reordering Threshold:

> : A variable-length integer representing an unsigned integer that indicates how
>   out of order packets can arrive before eliciting an immediate ACK. If no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: A variable-length integer representing an unsigned integer that indicates how
  many out of order packets can arrive before eliciting an immediate ACK. If no
```

Reviewer 3: Do we need "A variable-length integer representing an unsigned integer" or can we just rely on the fact that variable-length integers are always unsigned and say:

```suggestion
: A variable-length integer that indicates how many
  out of order packets can arrive before eliciting an immediate ACK. If no
```

packet. This extension modifies this behavior.

If the endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame, or if the most
recent frame received from the peer has a `Reordering Threshold` value that is
not 0x00, the endpoint MUST immediately acknowledge any subsequent packets that
are received out of order.

If the most recent ACK_FREQUENCY frame received from the peer has a `Reordering
Threshold` value of 0x00, the endpoint does not make this exception. That
is, the endpoint MUST NOT send an immediate acknowledgement in response to
packets received out of order, and instead continues to use the peer's
`Ack-Eliciting Threshold` and `max_ack_delay` thresholds for sending
acknowledgements.

### Reordering Threshold

If the most recent value of 'Reordering Threshold' is not 0x00, then in addition

> to the immediate acknowledgement when reordering is detected, an additional

Reviewer 4: I would recommend splitting this sentence, the bolting on of the "an additional ..." makes it hard to interpret. If I understand this correctly the main part of the sentence is to send an immediate ack when reordering of the threshold value or greater has been detected. The second part is more a clarification that even if a reordering immediate ack has been sent if a lost packet detected event occurs for the same packet then an another immediate ack would be sent. I think that might be clear to reformulate it.

In addition what conditions makes a receiver upgrade a reorder threshold exceeded to lost detected, isn't this the same? I thought in reality the only thing that can occur is that a reorder can go from packet missing (due to reorder) to acknowledged. If it is lost it will never show up and the gap persists.

Reviewer 2: Yes, there is not really any loss detection as the receiver side. The only question is when to send an ack. There are two cases: the normal delayed-ack timer or the re-ordering threshold.

immediate acknowledgement is sent when the peer can detect missing packets as

> lost.  This can speed up time threshold loss detection and therefore loss

Reviewer: Unsure what is intended by /time threshold loss detection/ refers to? --is this about the time taken for a sender to detect loss?

Reviewer: Suggest: /This can reduce the time to detect loss and therefore improve the performance of loss recovery./

recovery.

Every time an ACK frame is sent, the 'Largest Acknowledged' is saved in a local

> value (ie: largest_acknowledged_sent).  When a new packet is received in order,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
value (i.e., `largest_acknowledged_sent`).  When a new packet is received in order,
```

if there are any missing packets in the range
'[largest_acknowledged_sent - Reordering Threshold,

> largest_acknowledged - Reordering Threshold],' send an immediate ACK.

Reviewer 4: It took me several reads to understand what this was actually saying. I think an ", i.e. gap that are beyond the reordering threshold from latest received but not reported on in last ACK, then send an immediate ACK."

So If I understand this correctly, the receiver will re-iterate on gaps that are beyond threshold and thus considered lost as soon as they fall outside of the threshold. Thus a sender will not receive an immediate ack when things are actually just re-ordered and arrive to fill the gap as long as that happens within the threshold.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this as presented either.  Magnus' description fits better, maybe.

That would mean you are referring to the range from the Largest Acknowledged (i.e., the largest value in an ACK frame that has been sent) - Reordering Threshold to the Largest Received (i.e., the largest value in a packet that has been received) - Reordering Threshold.  That is [LA-RT, LR-RT].

I don't understand why you would look for gaps *before* the Largest Acknowledged here though.  Let's say the threshold is 2.  You receive packet 5 without getting packet 4.  That's a gap that would ordinarily elicit an immediate ACK.  But here you don't because it is newer than the 5-2=3 cutoff.  Then you wait for the time to pass and send an ACK.  Later, you receive packet 6, at which point your [LA-RT, LR-RT] range is [5-2=3, 6-2=4].  Presumably that includes packet 4[^1] so you send an immediate ACK.

That seems a bit pointless because you already informed the sender about that gap.  But maybe the sender logic won't detect loss until there are enough packets acknowledged beyond the gap, so this is useful.

You might instead want a range of [LA, LR-RT].  In that example, you would send an ACK on delay after packet 5 is received, meaning that the peer knows about the missing packet 4.  Later, when you receive 6, you don't send any more immediate ACKs.

The effect of either is that RT=1 has identical handling to RT=0.

[^1]: I don't know if you intentionally didn't say "inclusive", but I'm assuming that is why you are using brackets and not parentheses.  Please try to be explicit.

Reviewer 2: I think this mixes two different mechanism here. The Ack-Eliciting Threshold may trigger an ack independent of the Reordering threshold. For the reordering threshold the only thing that is relevant is the number of packets received after the re-ordering/packet number gap was detected.

That means you have to have an internal flags that indicates that a gap was detected and count the number of packet received since. If during this time either the missing packet is received or an ACK is sent due to any other condition, the flag and counter get reset. If the counter becomes larger than the reordering threshold you send an Ack and also reset the flag and counter.

send an acknowledgement immediately on receiving a reordered ack-eliciting
packet. This extension modifies this behavior.

If an endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame,
the endpoint immediately acknowledges any subsequent packets that
are received out of order, as specified in {{Section 13.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
An endpoint, that receives an ACK_FREQUENCY frame with a Reordering
Threshold value other than 0x00, MUST immediately send an ACK frame
when the packet number of largest unacknowledged packet since
the last detected reordering event exceeds the Reordering Threshold.

If the most recent ACK_FREQUENCY frame received from the peer has a `Reordering
Threshold` value of 0x00, the endpoint does not make this exception. That
is, the endpoint MUST NOT send an immediate acknowledgement in response to
packets received out of order, and instead continues to use the peer's
`Ack-Eliciting Threshold` and `max_ack_delay` thresholds for sending
acknowledgements.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

send an acknowledgement immediately on receiving a reordered ack-eliciting
packet. This extension modifies this behavior.

If an endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame,
the endpoint immediately acknowledges any subsequent packets that
are received out of order, as specified in {{Section 13.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
An endpoint, that receives an ACK_FREQUENCY frame with a Reordering
Threshold value other than 0x00, MUST immediately send an ACK frame
when the packet number of largest unacknowledged packet since
the last detected reordering event exceeds the Reordering Threshold.

If the most recent ACK_FREQUENCY frame received from the peer has a `Reordering
Threshold` value of 0x00, the endpoint does not make this exception. That
is, the endpoint MUST NOT send an immediate acknowledgement in response to
packets received out of order, and instead continues to use the peer's
`Ack-Eliciting Threshold` and `max_ack_delay` thresholds for sending
acknowledgements.

> ### Reordering Threshold
> 
> If the most recent value of 'Reordering Threshold' is not 0x00, then in addition
> to the immediate acknowledgement when reordering is detected, an additional
> immediate acknowledgement is sent when the peer can detect missing packets as
> lost. This can reduce the time to detect loss and therefore improve the performance of loss
> recovery.
> 
> Every time an ACK frame is sent, the 'Largest Acknowledged' is saved in a local
> value (i.e., `largest_acknowledged_sent`).  When a new packet is received in order,
> if there are any missing packets in the range
> '[largest_acknowledged_sent - Reordering Threshold,
> largest_acknowledged - Reordering Threshold],' send an immediate ACK.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

packet. This extension modifies this behavior.

> If the endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame, or if the most

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame,
the endpoint immediately acknowledges any subsequent packets that
are received out of order, as specified in {{Section 13.2 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
```

recent frame received from the peer has a `Reordering Threshold` value that is

> not 0x00, the endpoint MUST immediately acknowledge any subsequent packets that
> are received out of order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
smaller than the number of outstanding unacknowledged packets since
an on-going reordering started, the endpoint MUST immediately send an
ACK frame.
```

> recent frame received from the peer has a `Reordering Threshold` value that is
> not 0x00, the endpoint MUST immediately acknowledge any subsequent packets that
> are received out of order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an endpoint receives an ACK_FREQUENCY frame with a `Reordering Threshold` value other than 0x00
the endpoint MUST immediately send an ACK frame when number of outstanding unacknowledged packets since
a reordering event was detected is larger then the `Reordering Threshold`.
```

Reviewer: Sentence is wobbly, suggest more like:
/An endpoint that receives an ACK_FREQUENCY frame with a `Reordering Threshold` value other than 0x00, MUST immediately send an ACK frame when the number of outstanding unacknowledged packets since the last detected reordering event exceeds the `Reordering Threshold`./

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An endpoint, that receives an ACK_FREQUENCY frame with a Reordering
Threshold value other than 0x00, MUST immediately send an ACK frame
when the number of outstanding unacknowledged packets since
the last detected reordering event exceeds the Reordering Threshold.
```

Reviewer 2: Btw. we might maybe want to discuss if this is really a MUST or just a SHOULD because it's at the end just a request that can't be enforced by the requester.

Reviewer: I still think MUST, it's important for proper expected functioning. The word "immediately" appears in several IETF specs, and the sentiment is also that this needs to be done as soon as practically. The real sentiment is that this MUST NOT delay transmission of the response to the request.

If the most recent ACK_FREQUENCY frame received from the peer has a `Reordering
Threshold` value of 0x00, the endpoint does not make this exception. That
is, the endpoint MUST NOT send an immediate acknowledgement in response to
packets received out of order, and instead continues to use the peer's
`Ack-Eliciting Threshold` and `max_ack_delay` thresholds for sending
acknowledgements.

### Reordering Threshold

If the most recent value of 'Reordering Threshold' is not 0x00, then in addition
to the immediate acknowledgement when reordering is detected, an additional
immediate acknowledgement is sent when the peer can detect missing packets as

> lost.  This can speed up time threshold loss detection and therefore loss

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
lost. This can reduce the time to detect loss and therefore improve the performance of loss 
```

> ### Reordering Threshold
> 
> If the most recent value of 'Reordering Threshold' is not 0x00, then in addition
> to the immediate acknowledgement when reordering is detected, an additional
> immediate acknowledgement is sent when the peer can detect missing packets as
> lost.  This can speed up time threshold loss detection and therefore loss
> recovery.
> 
> Every time an ACK frame is sent, the 'Largest Acknowledged' is saved in a local
> value (i.e., `largest_acknowledged_sent`).  When a new packet is received in order,
> if there are any missing packets in the range
> '[largest_acknowledged_sent - Reordering Threshold,
> largest_acknowledged - Reordering Threshold],' send an immediate ACK.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I propose to remove this text for now, merge this PR, and then see if we need an additional PR to clarify implementation.

packet. This extension modifies this behavior.

If the endpoint has not yet received an ACK_FREQUENCY frame, or if the most
recent frame received from the peer has a `Reordering Threshold` value that is
not 0x00, the endpoint MUST immediately acknowledge any subsequent packets that

> are received out of order.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this sentence is correct anymore. You only should ack if you received more than X packet out of order. given the default value is 3, I guess you have to immediately send an ack if the new value is 1 or 2 and you have re-order packets that have not be ack'ed yet... not sure how to parse that easily.
